






In the previous two chapters, we examined the behavior of firms in a perfectly competitive market, where in the long run each firm produces at minimum average cost, and the equilibrium price is established at this level. In this chapter, we will focus on the analysis of <b>monopoly</b>, a market structure in which a single firm controls the entire supply of goods.

A market can become monopolistic for various reasons. In some cases, a firm may acquire exclusive control over essential resources or technologies for production, thereby preventing other firms from entering. In other cases, barriers to entry such as high initial costs or patents may exist. Still, in other cases, a monopoly can be created by state policies that grant a single firm the exclusive right to produce and sell a particular good or service.

To allow for a direct comparison between perfect competition and monopoly, we assume that the industry’s <i>technological</i> structure is the same — in each production unit, employing $L$ units of labor yields $Q=A\sqrt{L}$ units of output. Here, too, maintaining a production unit costs $FC$, and the price of labor is $W$. The crucial difference between perfect competition and monopoly lies in the industry’s <i>ownership</i> structure. While a competitive firm owns (and is therefore constrained to operate with) a single production unit, the monopolist owns all possible production units and can choose how many to employ.

This difference has an important consequence on the cost structure: in the case of monopoly, both marginal cost and average cost are constant and equal to $AC_\text{min}$ , as the monopolist can exploit all production units at the minimum possible cost. In other words, the monopolist, having access to all production units, can produce at the minimum cost for any quantity produced. This differs from perfect competition, where each firm produces at the minimum average cost but cannot expand production beyond its single production unit.

The second crucial difference from perfect competition is that the monopolist, unlike the competitive firm, is a price-maker and not a price-taker. In other words, while firms in perfect competition take the market price as given (being small relative to the market), the monopolist has the power to influence the price through its decision on how much to produce.

Thus, the monopolist differs from a competitive firm in two ways. The first concerns costs, as discussed earlier. The second concerns revenues, as the monopolist faces a negatively sloped demand curve and must reduce the price to sell additional quantities.

We will now begin addressing the monopolist's decision problem. The problem may seem much more complicated than that of a competitive firm. The latter only needs to decide how much to produce. In contrast, to identify its optimal choice, the monopolist must answer three questions:
<ul>
  <li>
    <p> <i>how much to produce</i> </p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p> <i>how many production units to use</i> </p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p> <i>how to allocate production across the production units</i> </p>
  </li>
</ul>
However, as we will see, given our assumptions, the problem will turn out to be much simpler than it appears. Once we analyze the monopolist's costs, only the first question will remain to be answered.



















<h2 id="SUBSEC_monopoly-costs">Monopolist's Costs</h2>

In the <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/4/2">previous chapter</a>, while discussing the efficiency of competitive markets, we observed that there was no alternative allocation of production between firms—other than each of them producing the same quantity—that would allow for lower costs. The same reasoning applies to a monopolist. Regardless of the quantity the monopolist intends to produce, and regardless of the number of production units they choose to operate, to minimize costs, the monopolist will find it optimal to allocate production equally across production units. The following figure, in which we assume the monopolist uses two production units, helps to reinforce this point.

<a id="gr_monopoly_mon-costs2"><strong>Figura 5.mon-costs2</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="monopoly/gr_mon-costs2" %}

In the figure, we have assumed that the monopolist uses two production units, but the same reasoning applies to any other number of units. It is always optimal for the monopolist to allocate production equally across the production units. Not only does this make economic sense, but it also simplifies the monopolist's problem significantly. If the monopolist wants to use $n$ production units to produce $Q$ units of output, they will always choose to produce $Q/n$ units in each of their $n$ units. The corresponding cost is therefore
<p><span style="color: Red;"> \(\begin{gathered} C_n (Q) = n \times \big[ FC + W \times (Q/n)^2 / A^2 \big] \end{gathered}\) </span></p>

Having answered the third question posed earlier, "how to allocate production across the production units," we are now ready to answer the second: how many production units to use? In other words, given any amount of output $Q$ that the monopolist might want to produce, which value of $n$ minimizes the cost $C_n(Q)$?

Rather than delving into calculations, we proceed intuitively. The number of production units that minimizes the cost of producing $Q$ units must be the one that minimizes the <i>average</i> cost of producing $Q$ units. Thus, we have answered the second question as well. Assuming, for simplicity, that the monopolist wants to produce an amount of output equal to $n$ times $Q^\text{eff}$, the least costly way to do this is to use $n$ production units and produce $Q^\text{eff}$ units of output in each of them.

<a id="gr_monopoly_mon-costs3"><strong>Figure 5.mon-costs3</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="monopoly/gr_mon-costs3" %}

<br><br>

At this point, the monopolist's cost structure should be clear. The monopolist's cost function is a straight line with slope equal to $Q^\text{eff}$, which is therefore the marginal cost (equal to average cost) of the monopolist.

<a id="gr_monopoly_mon-costs"><strong>Figure 5.mon-costs</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="monopoly/gr_mon-costs" %}





















<h2 id="subsec_monopoly-revenues">Monopolist's Revenues</h2>

The revenue function of a competitive firm is simple: each unit of output is sold at the market price, which is determined by forces virtually external to the firm — the production decisions of the individual firm have a negligible impact on the price. Therefore, the revenue function of a competitive firm is an upward-sloping straight line with a slope equal to the market price.

In the case of a monopoly, the situation changes radically. The monopolist has the power to influence the market price through their production choices. Unlike a competitive firm, the monopolist does not sell their output at a predetermined price: it is the monopolist who chooses the price through the two production decisions. The monopolist knows that in order to sell larger quantities, they must lower the price. Therefore, their revenue function is more complex: it takes the shape of an inverted U. Consequently, the monopolist's marginal revenue is also different from that of a competitive firm. Instead of being constant, it is decreasing: if the monopolist wants to increase the quantity produced, they must lower the price for all units sold, not just the additional ones.

<a id="gr_monopoly_mon-revenues"><strong>Figura 5.mon-revenues</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="monopoly/gr_mon-revenues" %}






















<h2 id="subsec_monopoly-choice">Monopolist's Optimal Choice</h2>

We are now ready to compute the monopolist's optimal choice, that is, to answer the first question posed earlier: how much to produce, or, equivalently, which price to choose? As with any firm, the optimal choice is determined by the equality between marginal revenue and marginal cost.



<a id="gr_monopoly_mon-choice"><strong>Figura 5.mon-choice</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="monopoly/gr_mon-choice" %}









<h1>_____OLD STUFF________</h1>




bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla 



<a id="tab_5.1.1"><strong>Tabella 5.1.1</strong></a>
<!---light blue = #d0eeff --->
<!---darker blue = #a2d0e9 --->
<!---light red = #ffa8a8 --->
<!---darker red = #ffd0d0 --->
<!---buyer darker color = #d5e1aa --->
<!---buyer light color = #e8f8c0 --->
<!---seller darker color = #f8e3c0 --->
<!---seller light color = #f8f4e1 --->
<style>
  .alf th,
  .alf td { padding: 1px; text-align: center; font-size: 18px; }
  .alf th { padding: 3px;  font-size: 20px; }
  .alf th:nth-child(1){ background-color: #84B5CF; }
  .alf th:nth-child(5){ background-color: #84B5CF; }
  .alf th:nth-child(4){ background-color: #B8C48E; }
  .alf th:nth-child(2){ background-color: #C1A282; }
  .alf th:nth-child(3){ background-color: #84B5CF; }

  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(2){background: #D0B292;} 
  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(2){background: #E2CAAF;} 

  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(4){background: #d5e1aa;} 
  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(4){background: #e8f8c0;} 

  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(3){background: #a2d0e9;} 
  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(3){background: #d0eeff;} 

  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(1){background: #a2d0e9;} 
  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(1){background: #d0eeff;} 

  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(5){background: #a2d0e9;} 
  .alf tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(5){background: #d0eeff;} 

  .alf tr:nth-child(6) {color: red; font-weight: bold; }

</style>

  <table class="alf">
    <tr>
      <th style="width:15%"> Output </th>
      <th style="width:15%"> Costo Totale </th>
      <th style="width:15%"> Prezzo </th>
      <th style="width:15%"> Ricavo </th>
      <th style="width:15%"> Profitto </th>
    </tr>
    <tr> <td>0</td>  <td>0.00</td> <td> - </td> <td>0.00</td> <td>0.00</td>  </tr>
    <tr> <td>1</td>  <td>2.50</td> <td>55.00</td> <td>55.00</td> <td>52.50</td>  </tr>
    <tr> <td>2</td>  <td>10.00</td> <td>50.00</td> <td>100.00</td> <td>90.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>3</td>  <td>22.50</td> <td>45.00</td> <td>135.00</td> <td>112.50</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>4</td>  <td>40.00</td> <td>40.00</td> <td>160.00</td> <td>120.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>5</td>  <td>62.50</td> <td>35.00</td> <td>175.00</td> <td>112.50</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>6</td>  <td>90.00</td> <td>30.00</td> <td>180.00</td> <td>90.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>7</td>  <td>122.50</td> <td>25.00</td> <td>175.00</td> <td>52.50</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>8</td>  <td>160.00</td> <td>20.00</td> <td>160.00</td> <td>0.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>9</td>  <td>202.50</td> <td>15.00</td> <td>135.00</td> <td>-67.50</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> </tr>
  </table>






bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla 






<a id="tab_5.1.2"><strong>Tabella 5.1.2</strong></a>
<!---light blue = #d0eeff --->
<!---darker blue = #a2d0e9 --->
<!---light red = #ffa8a8 --->
<!---darker red = #ffd0d0 --->
<!---buyer darker color = #d5e1aa --->
<!---buyer light color = #e8f8c0 --->
<!---seller darker color = #f8e3c0 --->
<!---seller light color = #f8f4e1 --->
<style>
  .alf2 th,
  .alf2 td { padding: 1px; text-align: center; font-size: 18px; }
  .alf2 th { padding: 3px;  font-size: 20px; }
  .alf2 th:nth-child(1){ background-color: #84B5CF; }
  .alf2 th:nth-child(5){ background-color: #B8C48E; }
  .alf2 th:nth-child(4){ background-color: #FF6464; }
  .alf2 th:nth-child(2){ background-color: #C1A282; }
  .alf2 th:nth-child(3){ background-color: #84B5CF; }


  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(1){background: #a2d0e9;} 
  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(1){background: #d0eeff;} 

  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(3){background: #a2d0e9;} 
  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(3){background: #d0eeff;} 

  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(5){background: #d5e1aa;} 
  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(5){background: #e8f8c0;} 

  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(4){background: #ffabab;} 
  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(4){background: #ff8d8d;} 

  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+1) td:nth-child(2){background: #D0B292;} 
  .alf2 tr:nth-child(2n+2) td:nth-child(2){background: #E2CAAF;} 

  .alf2 tr:nth-child(5) {color: red; font-weight: normal; }

</style>

  <table class="alf2">
    <tr>
      <th style="width:10%"> Output </th>
      <th style="width:20%"> Costo Totale Medio </th>
      <th style="width:15%"> Prezzo </th>
      <th style="width:20%"> Costo Marginale </th>
      <th style="width:15%"> Ricavo Marginale</th>
    </tr>
    <tr> <td>1</td> <td>2.50</td> <td>55.00</td> <td>2.50</td> <td>55.00</td>  </tr>
    <tr> <td>2</td> <td>5.00</td> <td>50.00</td> <td>7.50</td> <td>45.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>3</td> <td>7.50</td> <td>45.00</td> <td>12.50</td> <td>35.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>4</td> <td>10.00</td> <td>40.00</td> <td>17.50</td> <td>25.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>5</td> <td>12.50</td> <td>35.00</td> <td>22.50</td> <td>15.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>6</td> <td>15.00</td> <td>30.00</td> <td>27.50</td> <td>5.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>7</td> <td>17.50</td> <td>25.00</td> <td>32.50</td> <td>-5.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>8</td> <td>20.00</td> <td>20.00</td> <td>37.50</td> <td>-15.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>9</td> <td>22.50</td> <td>15.00</td> <td>42.50</td> <td>-25.00</td> </tr>
    <tr> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> <td>$\vdots$</td> </tr>
  </table>


