


In the previous section, we saw that the non-observability of the manager’s effort is a necessary condition for the contract between manager and firm to be inefficient: if effort is observable (and can be part of legally binding agreements), then there exists a contract that maximizes total surplus. We also saw that the non-observability of effort is not <i>by itself</i> a sufficient condition to generate inefficiency: if the agent is risk-neutral, a second-best contract can replicate what happens in the first-best situation. The latter result relies on two often unrealistic assumptions. The first is that there is no lower bound on the manager’s monetary compensation. The second is the risk neutrality of the worker. In this section, we will see that the result no longer holds when even just one of these two assumptions is not satisfied.





<h2 id="subsec_mh-limited">Limited Liability</h2>

bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla 


<a id="gr_moralhazard/limited"><strong>Figure 11.XX (moralhazard/limited)</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="moralhazard/gr_limited" %}

  
The limited liability constraint has no effect on total surplus if the firm’s reservation profit is less than 1800 euros. In this case, the firm undertakes the project and thus creates surplus exactly as in the first-best scenario. In fact, the constraint only affects the distribution of surplus: the firm’s profit is 75 euros lower than in the first best, but this reduction is not wasted money—the worker’s surplus increases by exactly the same amount (the expected wage is 700 euros, compared to the 625 euros under a first-best contract).

So, where does the inefficiency lie? It arises when the firm’s reservation profit is between 1800 and 1875 euros. In this case, the firm’s optimal choice is not to offer a contract (or to offer one that is unacceptable to the manager). As a result, the firm does not undertake the project, thus creating zero surplus—whereas it would have done so in the absence of the constraint.








<h2 id="subsec_mh-riskaverse">Risk Aversion</h2>

bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla 

<a id="gr_moralhazard/riskaverse"><strong>Figure 11.XX (moralhazard/riskaverse)</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="moralhazard/gr_riskaverse" %}

bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla bla 
