


Our theory of the consumer's choice assumes that in making these choices individuals take their income as given. In reality, a consumer's income depends for the greater part on the consumer's <i>labor choices</i>, that is, how much time to sell to those who demand it (namely firms,, as we will see in the <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/II/L/2">next section</a>). Fortunately, analyzing these choices does not require a new theory. As we shall now see, labor supply can be analyzed by studying demand for leisure.



<h2 id="SUBSEC_LS1">The Consumer/Worker's Budget Constraint</h2>

Consider a consumer/worker who must decide how much free time to have (and hence how much to work) and how much of a generic good to consume. Let us write $T$ for the total time the individual is endowed with (e.g. 7 days per week), $N$ for the days of leisure ($0\leq N\leq T$), and $C$ for the quantity of the good the individual consumes. The individual's objective is to maximize utility $U(N,C)$ subject to her budget constraint. To understand the budget constraint faced by the consumer/worker, denote by $P$ the price of consumption, by $W$ the daily wage, and by $M_0$ the non-labor income of the individual. The budget constraint is then

<p><span style="color: Blue;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 PC = M_0 + W(T-N)
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>


<a id="gr_labor/budget"><strong>Figure 9.1 (labor/budget)</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/labor/gr_budget" %}












<h2 id="SUBSEC_LS2">Optimal Choice and Individual Labor Supply Function</h2>

Assuming that the consumer/worker's preferences are of the Cobb-Douglas type

<p><span style="color: Black;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 U(N,C) = N^aC^b
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>

the figure below illustrates the individual's optimal choice and how this choice depends on the preference parameters ($a$ and $b$), on non-labor income $M_0$, and on wage $W$.

Computing the individual's optimal choice is slightly more complicated than in the case of two consumption goods. If the non-labor income  $M_0$ is positive, the budget constraint does not touch the horizontal axis, and the optimal choice might be a <i>corner solution</i> rather than an <i>internal solution</i>. It should be clear from the figure that this happens when the non-labor income is $M_0$ is positive and the real wage $W/P$ is sufficiently low.


<a id="gr_labor/optchoice"><strong>Figure 9.2 (labor/optchoice)</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/labor/gr_optchoice" %}












<h2 id="SUBSEC_LS3">Market Labor Supply</h2>

Just like we do in every other market, we obtain the labor market supply function simply by adding horizontally the individual labor supply functions. The following figure depicts the market supply function corresponding to a population of identical workers, each with utility function $U(N,C)=NC^2$.

<a id="gr_labor/LS"><strong>Figura 9.3 (labor/LS)</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/labor/gr_LS" %}








