


A relevant issue in many labor markets is market power on the demand side, which occurs when there are only a few employers, or perhaps just one. A market where a single buyer is present is called a <b>monopsony</b>.


<h2 id="SUBSEC_boh2.1-it">Monopsonist's Optimal Choice</h2>

The analysis of monopsony mirrors that of monopoly. In a monopolistic market the firm faces a downward-sloping demand curve for its product: the firm knows that selling higher quantities requires fixing a lower price. Analogously, in a monopsonistic labor market the firm faces an upward-sloping labor supply function: the firm knows that hiring more labor requires paying a higher daily wage. As a consequence, the monopsonist's marginal labor cost function is increasing rather than constant.

Let us make an example. Suppose that the (inverse) labor market supply function is $W=20+L/100$. The firm's cost is therefore $C=(20+L/100)\times L$ and hence the marginal labor cost is $MLC=20+L/50$, an increasing function of $L$.

Just like a competitive firm, a monopsonist optimally hires labor up to the point where marginal labor revenue equals marginal labor cost. Compared to a competitive labor market, however, both employment $L^M$ and wage $W^M$  are lower, as we illustrate in the figure below. In the figure we assume that the marginal labor revenue function is  $MLR=80-L/100$.  


<a id="gr_labor/MPS"><strong>Figure 9.8 (labor/MPS)</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/labor/gr_MPS" %}





<h2 id="SUBSEC_MW2-it">Minimum Wage</h2>

Introducing a minimum wage changes the monopsonist's marginal labor cost. The reason is that the units of labor that workers are willing to supply for less than the minimum wage must be still paid the minimum wage. Indeed, by law the firm cannot pay less than that. The $MLC$ curve is therefore flat (at a level equal to the minimum wage) up to the quantity of labor supplied at the minimum wage; beyond that quantity, it coincides with the marginal labor cost curve without the intervention.

Just like in the case of a perfectly competitive labor market, a minimum wage smaller than the equilibrium wage (i.e. lower than the monopsony wage $W^M$) has no impact on the market. A minimum wage higher than the monopsony wage instead determines an increase of both wage and emplyment  (and hence a reduction of the deadweight loss), as long as the minimum wage is not too high. The following figure illustrates these facts. 

<a id="gr_labor/MPSmin"><strong>Figure 9.9 (labor/MPSmin)</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/labor/gr_MPSmin" %}

